        SOURCE: Wikipedia
        TITLE: Tukaram
        URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tukaram
        DOMAIN: Mythology
RASA: Karuna
        COLLECTED: 2026-04-19T22:56:34.237956
        ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Tukaram (Marathi pronunciation: [t̪ukaːɾam]), also known as Tuka, Tukobaraya, and Tukoba, was a Hindu Marathi saint of the Warkari Sampradaya who lived in the 17th century. He was a devotee of the god Vithoba, a form of Vishnu. He is best known for his devotional poetry called abhanga, which is popular in Maharashtra. Many of his poems deal with social reform.
Tukaram was born in the modern-day Maharashtra state of India. His complete name was Tukaram Bolhoba Ambile.
He spent most of his later years in devotional worship, community kirtans (group prayers with singing) and composing Abhanga poetry.
Tukaram pointed out social injustices, caste hierarchy, and the misconduct of certain religious leaders through his kiratans and abhangs. As a result, he faced opposition from various sections of society. One of his main detractors was Mambaji Gosavi, who ran a matha (monastic establishment) in Dehu and had several followers. Initially, Tukaram entrusted him with the task of performing puja at his temple. However, Mambaji became increasingly jealous of Tukaram’s growing popularity and respect among the villagers. At one point, he attacked Tukaram with a thorn stick and used abusive language against him.
Mambaji continued to oppose Tukaram, blaming him for the loss of traditional abhangas, which conveyed reformist ideas that challenged the dominant Brahmanical orthodoxy. Such views were not widely accepted at the time, particularly by individuals like Mambaji. Ironically, he later became one of Tukaram’s devotees, though only after facing considerable personal humiliation.
Tukaram is also believed to have met Shivaji – the founder of the Maratha Empire; their continued interaction is considered legendary. Eleanor Zelliot notes that poets from the Bhakti movement, including Tukaram, significantly influenced Shivaji’s rise to power. Some accounts even claim that Tukaram once saved Chhatrapati Shivaji's life from pursuing Mughal forces.
It is widely accepted by historians that Saint Tukaram died in 1650.
Philosophy and practices
In his work of Abhangas, Tukarama repeatedly refers to four people who had a primary influence on his spiritual development, namely the earlier Bhakti Sants Namdev, Dnyaneshwar, Kabir and Eknath. Early 20th-century scholars on Tukaram considered his teachings to be Vedanta-based but lacking a systematic theme. JF Edwards wrote,
Tukaram is never systematic in his psychology, his theology, or his theodicy. He oscillates between a Dvaitist [Vedanta] and an Advaitist view of God and the world, leaning now to a pantheistic scheme of things, now to a distinctly Providential, and he does not harmonize them. He says little about cosmogony, and according to him, God realizes Himself in the devotion of His worshippers. Likewise, faith is essential to their realization of Him: 'It is our faith that makes thee a god', he says boldly to his Vithoba.
Late 20th-century scholarship of Tukaram, and translations of his Abhanga poem, affirm his pantheistic Vedantic view. Tukaram's Abhanga 2877, as translated by Shri Gurudev Ranade of Nimbal states, for example, "The Vedanta has said that the whole universe is filled by God. All sciences have proclaimed that God has filled the whole world. The Puranas have unmistakably taught the universal immanence of God. The sants have told us that the world is filled by God. Tuka indeed is playing in the world uncontaminated by it like the Sun which stands absolutely transcendent".
Scholars note the often discussed controversy, particularly among Marathi people, whether Tukaram subscribed to the monistic Vedanta philosophy of Adi Shankara. Bhandarkar notes that Abhanga 300, 1992 and 2482 attributed to Tukaram are in style and philosophy of Adi Shankara:
However, scholars also note that other Abhangas attributed to Tukaram criticize monism, and favor dualistic Vedanta philosophy of the Indian philosophers Madhvacharya and Ramanuja. In Abhanga 1471, according to Bhandarkar's translation, Tukaram says, "When monism is expounded without faith and love, the expounder as well as the hearer are troubled and afflicted. He who calls himself Brahma and goes on in his usual way, should not be spoken to and is a buffoon. The shameless one who speaks heresy in opposition to the Vedas is an object of scorn among holy men."
Tukaram denounced mechanical rites, rituals, sacrifices, vows and instead encouraged direct form of bhakti (devotion).
Tukaram encouraged kirtan as a music imbued, community-oriented group singing and dancing form of bhakti. He considered kirtan not just a means to learn about Bhakti, but Bhakti itself. The greatest merit in kirtan, according to Tukaram, is it being not only a spiritual path for the devotee, it helps create a spiritual path for others.
Tukaram accepted disciples and devotees without discriminating on the basis of gender. One of his celebrated devotees was Bahina Bai, a Brahmin woman, who faced anger and abuse of her husband when she chose Bhakti marga and Tukaram as her guru.
Tukaram taught, states Ranade, that "pride of caste never made any man holy", "the Vedas and Shastras have said that for the service of God, castes do not matter", "castes do not matter, it is God's name that matters", and "an outcast who loves the Name of God is verily a Brahmin; in him have tranquility, forbearance, compassion and courage made their home". However, early 20th century scholars questioned whether Tukaram himself observed caste when his daughters from his second wife married men of their own caste. Fraser and Edwards, in their 1921 review of Tukaram, stated that this is not necessarily so, because people in the West too generally prefer relatives to marry those of their own economic and social strata.
David Lorenzen states that the acceptance, efforts and reform role of Tukaram in the Varakari-sampraday follows the diverse caste and gender distributions found in Bhakti movements across India. The rest include ten Brahmins and two whose caste origins are unknown. Of the twenty one, four women are celebrated as sant, born in two Brahmin and two non-Brahmin families. Tukaram's effort at social reforms within Varakari-sampraday must be viewed in this historical context and as part of the overall movement, states Lorenzen.
Tukaram composed Abhanga poetry, a Marathi genre of literature which is metrical (traditionally the ovi meter), simple, direct, and it fuses folk stories with deeper spiritual themes.
Tukaram's work is known for informal verses of rapturous abandon in folksy style, composed in vernacular language, in contrast to his predecessors such as Dnyandeva or Namdev known for combining similar depth of thought with a grace of style.
In one of his poems, Tukaram self-effacingly described himself as a "fool, confused, lost, liking solitude because I am wearied of the world, worshipping Vitthal (Vishnu) just like my ancestors were doing but I lack their faith and devotion, and there is nothing holy about me".
Tukaram Gatha is a Marathi language compilation of his works, likely composed between 1632 and 1650. Also called Abhanga Gatha, the Indian tradition believes it includes some 4,500 abhangas. The poems considered authentic cover a wide range of human emotions and life experiences, some autobiographical, and places them in a spiritual context. He includes a discussion about the conflict between Pravritti – having passion for life, family, business, and Nivritti – the desire to renounce, leave everything behind for individual liberation, moksha.
Ranade states there are four major collations of Tukaram's Abhanga Gathas.
The first compilation of Tukaram poems was published, in modern format, by Indu Prakash publishers in 1869, subsidized by the British colonial government's Bombay Presidency. The 1869 edition noted, "some of the [as received] manuscripts on which the compilation relied, had been 'corrected', 'further corrected' and 'arranged'." This doctoring and rewriting over about 200 years, after Tukaram's death, has raised questions whether the modern compilation of Tukaram's poems faithfully represents what Tukaram actually thought and said, and the historicity of the document. The known manuscripts are jumbled, randomly scattered collections, without chronological sequence, and each contains some poems that are not found in all other known manuscripts.
Books and translations
The 18th-century biographer Mahipati, in his four volume compilation of the lives of many Bhakti movement sants, included Tukaram. Mahipati's treatise has been translated by Justin Abbott.
A translation of about 3,700 poems from Tukaram Gatha in English was published, in three volumes, between 1909 and 1915, by Fraser and Marathe. In 1922, Fraser and Edwards published his biography and religious ideas incorporating some translations of Tukaram's poems, and included a comparison of Tukaram's philosophy and theology with those of Christianity. Deleury, in 1956, published a metric French translation of a selection of Tukaram's poem along with an introduction to the religious heritage of Tukaram (Deleury spells him as Toukaram).
Arun Kolatkar published, in 1966, six volumes of avant-garde translations of Tukaram poems. Ranade has published a critical biography and some selected translation.
Dilip Chitre translated writings of Sant Tukaram into English in the book titled Says Tuka for which he was awarded the Sahitya Akademi award in 1994. A selection of poems of Tukaram has been translated and published by Daniel Ladinsky.
Chandrakant Kaluram Mhatre has translated selected poems of Tukaram, published as One Hundred Poems of Tukaram.
Tukaram's abhangs are very popular in Maharashtra. It became part of the culture of the state. Varkaris, poets and peoples study his poems. His poems are popular in rural Maharashtra and their popularity is increasing. Tukaram was a devotee of Vithoba (Vitthala), an avatar of God Vishnu, synchronous with Krishna but with regional style and features. Tukaram's literary works, along with those of sants Dnyandev, Namdev and Eknath, states Mohan Lal, are credited to have propelled Varkari tradition into pan-Indian Bhakti literature.
According to Richard Eaton, from early 14th-century when Maharashtra region came under the rule of the Delhi Sultanate, down to the 17th century, the legacy of Tukaram and his poet-predecessors, "gave voice to a deep-rooted collective identity among Marathi-speakers". Dilip Chitre summarizes the legacy of Tukaram and Bhakti movement sants, during this period of Hindu-Muslim wars, as transforming "language of shared religion, and religion a shared language. It is they who helped to bind the Marathas together against the Mughals on the basis not of any religious ideology but of a territorial cultural identity".
Mahatma Gandhi, in early 20th century, while under arrest in Yerwada Central Jail by the British colonial government for his non-violent movement, read and translated Tukaram's poetry along with Upanishads, Bhagavad Gita and poems by other Bhakti movement poet-saints.
Sant Tukaram also had a profound influence on K. B. Hedgewar as the former's quotes often found their way on the latter's letterhead. One such letter dated April 6, 1940 bore the quote "Daya tiche nanwa bhutanche palan, aanik nirdalan kantkache", meaning compassion is not only the welfare of all living beings, but also includes protecting them from harm's way.
Places associated with Tukaram
Places associated with Tukaram in Dehu that exist today are:
Tukaram Maharaj Janm Sthan Temple, Dehu – place where Tukaramji was born, around which a temple was built later
Sant Tukaram Vaikunthstan Temple, Dehu – from where Tukaramji ascended to Vaikuntha (Abode of God) in his mortal form; there is a beautiful ghat behind this temple along the Indrayani river
Sant Tukaram Maharaj Gatha Mandir, Dehu – modern structure; massive building housing a big statue of Tukaram; In the Gatha temple, about 4,000 abhangs (verses) created by Tukaram maharaj were carved on the walls.
Movies and popular culture
A number of Indian films have been made about the saint in different languages. These include:
Tukaram (1921) silent film by Shinde.
Sant Tukaram (1921) silent film by Kalanidhi Pictures.
Sant Tukaram (1936) – this movie on Tukaram was screened open-air for a year, to packed audiences in Mumbai, and numerous rural people would walk very long distances to see it.
Thukkaram (1938) in Tamil by B. N. Rao.
Santha Thukaram (1963) in Kannada
Sant Tukaram (1965) in Hindi
Bhakta Tukaram (1973) in Telugu
Tukaram (2012) in Marathi
Sant Tukaram (2025) in Hindi
Abhanga Tukaram (2025) in Marathi
Tukaram's life was the subject of the 68th issue of Amar Chitra Katha, India's largest comic book series.
Balbharti has included a poem of Tukaram in a Marathi school textbook
The government of India had issued a 100 rupee Silver commemorative coin in 2002.
Pandharpur Wari – the largest annual pilgrimage in Maharashtra that includes a ceremonial Palkhi of Tukaram
Vitthal Temple, Pandharpur
Babb, Lawrence A.; Wadley, Susan S. (31 May 1998). Media and the Transformation of Religion in South Asia. Motilal Banarsidass Publ. ISBN 978-81-208-1453-0.
Chowdhry, Prem (2000). Colonial India and the Making of Empire Cinema: Image, Ideology and Identity. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-5792-2.
Chitre, Dilip (1991). Says Tuka: Selected Poetry of Tukaram. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-044597-8.
Feldhaus, Anne (1982). "BahināBāī: Wife and Saint". Journal of the American Academy of Religion. L (4): 591–604. doi:10.1093/jaarel/l.4.591. ISSN 0002-7189.
Tulpule, S. G.; Shelke, Christopher (25 September 1992). McGregor, R. S. (ed.). Devotional Literature in South Asia: Current Research, 1985-1988. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-41311-4.
Ranade, Ramchandra D. (1994). Tukaram. New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-7914-2092-2.
Ayyappapanicker, K.; Akademi, Sahitya (1997). Medieval Indian Literature: An Anthology. Sahitya Akademi. ISBN 81-260-0365-0.
"Tryambak Shankar Shejwalkar Nivadak Lekhsangrah" by T S Shejwalkar (collection- H V Mote, Introduction- G D Khanolkar)
John Hoyland (1932), An Indian Peasant Mystic: Translations from Tukaram, London: Allenson, OCLC 504680225
Wilbur Deming (1932), Selections from Tukaram, Christian Literature Society, OCLC 1922126
Prabhakar Machwe (1977), Tukaram's Poems, United Writer, OCLC 4497514
Dilip Chitre (1970), The Bhakta as a Poet: Six Examples from Tukaram's Poetry, Delos: A Journal on and of Translation, Vol. 4, pages 132-136
Fraser, James Nelson; Rev. JF Edwards (1922). The Life and Teaching of Tukārām. The Christian Literature Society for India, Madras.
Fraser and Marathe (1915), The Poems of Tukaram, 3 vols, Christian Literature Society OCLC 504680214, Reprinted in 1981 by Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120808515
Works by or about Tukaram at the Internet Archive
Collected works of Tukaram in Devnagari
Sant Tukaram Gatha at Internet Archive
Images, Biography: Tukaram Ram Bapat (2002), Tukaram Online, 14 Indian and 8 foreign languages
What I Want to Say, Tukaram, Mona van Duyn (1965), Poetry, Vol. 107, No. 2, pages 102-104
Twenty five poems, Tukaram Prabhakar Machwe (1968), Mahfil, Vol. 5, No. 1/2, pages 61–69
Translations from Tukaram and other saint-poets, Awad Kolatkar (1982), Journal of South Asian Literature, Vol. 17, No. 1, pages 111-114