SOURCE: Web
TITLE: Ministry of Culture — Classical Dance Forms
URL: https://indiaculture.gov.in/classical-dance-forms
DOMAIN: Classical Dance
COLLECTED: 2026-04-19T11:05:18.779121
────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────

Request for Proposal (RFP) for engagement of an Event Management Agency for organizing the Parakram Diwas, 2026
Observance of Vigilance Awareness Week from 27th October to 2nd November, 2025
Ministry of Culture is undertaking the Special Campaign 5.0 from 2nd Oct - 31st Oct 2025.
Ministry of Culture launches 7th edition of PM’s Mementos E-Auction from 17th Sept–24th Oct 2025.
Ministry of Culture marks Sewa Parv 2025 with art workshops at 75 locations from 17th Sept–2nd Oct 2025.
The Gyan Bharatam Mission will not only preserve manuscripts but also open new domains of research, innovation, and data-driven opportunities for the youth, making our heritage a source of strength and power for the future.
International Conference on Gyan Bharatam in New Delhi
The primary mandate of the Ministry of Culture is the preservation and conservation of ancient cultural heritage and the promotion of tangible and intangible art and culture. The Ministry has 2 attached offices, 7 subordinate offices, and 34 autonomous organizations, which are fully funded by the Government.
Broadly, the Ministry is working on the protection, development, and promotion of the country’s tangible heritage, intangible heritage, and knowledge heritage. In addition, the Ministry also harbours the responsibility of nurturing Gandhian heritage and commemorating important historical events and centenaries of great personalities.
Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat
Hon'ble Minister of Culture
Hon'ble Minister of State for Culture
Financial Assistance for Tagore Cultural Complexes (TCC)
Financial Assistance for Allied Cultural Activities
Centenary and Anniversary Celebrations Scheme
Scheme of Financial Assistance under Seva Bhoj Yojna
Scheme for Promotion of Culture of Science (SPOCS)
Adveritisement of 02 posts of Anthropologist (Cultural Anthropology Division) and Anthropologist (Physical Anthropology Division) in AnSI
Recuritment for the Post of Director in CCRT
Filling up the post of Consertvator , Group 'A', Gazetted. By Deputation in the National Museum under the Ministry of Culture, Govt. Of India.
Filling up the post of Curator (Anthropology) , Group A, Gazetted. Deputation in the National Museum under the Ministry of Culture, Govt. Of India.
Engagement of Retired Central Govt. Servant as Consultant (Finance & Accounts)
Filling up the post of Senior Technical Assistant
Request for Proposal (RFP) for Appointment of a Technology Partner for Development & Deployment of Al integration
Request for Proposal for Engagement of an Agency for Design, Fabrication, Deployment & Management of Vande Mataram Recording Booths
Request for Proposal (RFP) for engagement of an Event Management Agency for organizing the Parakram Diwas, 2026
RFP FOR EMPANELMENT OF HERITAGE CONSERVATION ARCHITECTS BY NATIONAL CULTURE FUND (NCF). PRE-BID MEETING 30.12.25 RESPONSE.
Ministry of Culture Announces 7th Edition of Prime Minister’s Mementos E-Auction
Sewa Parv 2025: Viksit Bharat Ke Rang, Kala Ke Sang
Ministry of Culture Launches “Swachhata Hi Seva” 2025
Gyan Bharatam to Safeguard India’s Manuscript Legacy
President Droupadi Murmu Inaugurates Two-Day National Literary Conference at Rashtrapati Bhavan
Press Release : Hon'ble Education Minister, Government of India inaugurated “Ministry of Culture Pavilion” at New Delhi World Book Fair 2026, Bharat M
Press Release : Hon'ble Education Minister, Government of India inaugurated “Ministry of Culture Pavilion” at New Delhi World Book Fair 2026, Bharat M
During the New Delhi world Book fair 2026, Sahitya Akademi organized two programmes a 'Face-to-Face' and 'Poetry Reading.
During the New Delhi world Book fair 2026, Sahitya Akademi organized two programmes a 'Face-to-Face' and 'Poetry Reading.
SahityaAkademi organized 'Face-to-Face' and 'Story Reading' Literary Programmes at the #NewDelhiWorldBookFair2026.
SahityaAkademi organized 'Face-to-Face' and 'Story Reading' Literary Programmes at the #NewDelhiWorldBookFair2026.
Press Release : "Indo-Russian Writers' Meet" organised by Sahitya Akademi at Rabindra Bhavan, New Delhi.
Press Release : "Indo-Russian Writers' Meet" organised by Sahitya Akademi at Rabindra Bhavan, New Delhi.
Cultural Schemes Dashboard
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts
National Cultural Audiovisual Archives (NCAA)
Central Secretariat Library
National Library of India
Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya
SHe-Box (Online Complaint Management System)
UTSAV- Portal for Festival, Events and Live Darshan
Jayadeva's Gīta Govinda beautifully intertwines poetry, art, and devotion to tell the eternal love story of Radha and Krishna. This exquisite manuscript, written in Bengali by an unknown subscriber on paper, … ( 1/3 )
pic.twitter.com/f2DuPTfSww
— Ministry of Culture (@MinOfCultureGoI)
All rights reserved to Ministry of Culture, Government of India
This website uses cookies to provide a better user experience.
By clicking accept, you agree to the policies outlined in the